---
layout: post
title: goodness..
author: jeri.elizabeth

permalink: /blog/2012/09/19/goodness/
tags: coursework

---
so. programming.

right.

who thought this was a good idea?

Oh yeah, me.

This week I have been super focused on catching up.

I thought I was being all brilliant by using data that already existed. Ha! Wrong!

Instead, I spent way too much time getting my head around what data I had, what I wanted to do with it, and what I needed to do to it in order to be able to do said things.

Why was this a problem you ask? Well, there are nearly 200,000 lines in the &#8220;text&#8221; csv file for one. For two, the names aren&#8217;t standardized. For three, the hymnal information I really wanted to use doesn&#8217;t have data regarding the texts included nor vice-versa. And I looked, and these text can appear in hundreds (HUNDREDS!) of hymnals. and so my brain exploded.

Then I remembered that we&#8217;re supposed to be learning methods, not necessarily solving this particular data problem. So I&#8217;ve given up on the hymnals for now and am just looking at texts and authors. I selected out the authors recorded as born between 1800 &#8211; 1809 and then pulled the texts that corresponded with them as best I could &#8211; this proved somewhat difficult because of the variety of ways the name appeared in the text file.

But the end of the story is I have a database that I can work with, and a join table that seems to be functioning. I have yet to figure out how best to harness the power of the join table, but I think I&#8217;m getting somewhere.

The current state of this work is at [clio3.jeriwieringa.com][1]. (index is viewable at the root)

First caveat: I am not doing any of the dev work here &#8211; I am just uploading for presentation. I can&#8217;t create a new user on my account (the downside to cheap virtual private servers) so I&#8217;m a bit nervous about the whole thing. I want to put this an EC2 instance, but, well, that&#8217;s another puzzle to figure out. I am cheating and getting help from my [personal tech team][2], but he&#8217;s been a bit busy. So this is my temporary solution.

Second caveat: this is built on top of a &#8220;temp&#8221; version of the database (and one before I split up the author column in texts to create an accurate join table.) This means if things get changed, it&#8217;s ok. for the most part. i guess&#8230;

What&#8217;s working:

*   I decided to split the view pages into an author view and a text view. These can be viewed as a large list or paginated.
*   Delete does work, but I removed it &#8230; didn&#8217;t want my database to disappear.

<span style="font-size: medium;">What still needs work:</span>

*   I am trying to figure out how to create a &#8220;show&#8221; page, where you would see an individual author information and the list of texts associated with that author. Same (but reversed) with the texts.
*   The add and edit page displays for authors, but I&#8217;m getting an error during the submit process that I&#8217;m still figuring out. This then needs to be done for texts as well. Or I need to figure out how to make my data more simple again.
*   And everything else that breaks but I don&#8217;t know about yet.

And that&#8217;s were it&#8217;s at right now.

 [1]: http://clio3.jeriwieringa.com/view-author.php
 [2]: https://twitter.com/jwieringa
